Sean Stevenson welcome back to the show
I am very excited to talk to you and at
the end I want everybody to stay tuned
because I'm going to give you the best
John Stevenson quote which sums up one
of the most important principles you
will ever encounter in your life but
first I want to ask you for people that
struggle with weight loss and or chronic
inflammation what is something that they
can add to their diet that would help or
is this simply a game of stripping away
oh such a great question you know even
if we look at something like obesity
It's always important to look at what is
the underlying
Foundation of this outward appearance or
this outward manifestation of a thing
right and so this term inflammation has
been gaining traction it's been around
for a long time and you know the Latin
and Greek Roots it's essentially to set
Ablaze right to set something on fire
and inflammation can get drugged through
the mud as this bad thing and we want to
stop all inflammation but inflammation
is critical for all functions of life
without inflammation we wouldn't heal
from an infection we wouldn't heal from
wounds we wouldn't heal from a workout
right it's a critical part of our lives
and of our livelihood however
when we dip into this place of chronic
inflammation right acute inflammation is
one thing but it's kind of like a
low-grade fever and one of the things
that we know today is that when our fat
cells are overly full they start to send
out sort of this false distress signal
pulling in immune factors as if you're
infected and so researchers at the
Albert Einstein College of Medicine
found out how this is connected and
essentially one of the biggest issues
with inflammation is hypothalamic
inflammation in the brain Okay so we've
got inflammation in the body from a fat
cells distress signal and they found
that this inflammation the brain in the
brain was creating more body fat and
creating higher levels of metabolic
dysfunction and that metabolic metabolic
dysfunction and higher levels of body
fat is creating more inflammation in the
brain so what do we do to help to bring
a resolution here because what happens
is a vicious circle obviously if neural
inflammation is creating more body fat
and body fats creating more neural
inflammation we're getting trapped in
this vicious Circle and most people are
stuck in that and their favorite
Instagram you know account or even their
physician isn't telling them we need to
address this inflammation specifically
in your brain to help to heal your body
so researchers at Auburn University
found that there's this particular food
and I don't have a dog in the fight I
didn't I didn't care this much about the
fact yeah and and you know I was just
blown away that this actually had this
action in the body what they found was
that oleocanthal rich extra virgin olive
oil is able to help to reduce neural
inflammation specifically helping to
heal the blood-brain barrier which is
has a tendency to get broken down by our
abnormal diet allowing more of these
kind of toxicants into the brain and
creating more inflammation do they know
the method of action
no we know so little still you know we
know a ton in nutrition right now but we
probably know maybe one percent of all
the there is to know right now yep it's
still so much more for us to discover
and so when folks are reaching out to
learn from folks you got to keep in mind
that even your favorite expert knows so
little and we can tend to put all of our
eggs in one basket in a sense with a
certain diet framework a belief about
diet
we might find out later on that olive
oil has some opposite effect but this is
what we know right now and I always like
to point people to leaning into
tradition humans have been utilizing
olive oil for thousands thousands upon
thousands of years
and it's very simply made because
there's also this movement today which
I'm grateful for towards addressing our
consumption of ultra processed foods
right now the average American
the average American's diet is 60 Ultra
processed foods right now whoa all right
I'm not surprised at all but still
hearing you say that is startling it's
crazy it's crazy but we have to be clear
up on Ultra I know you did me too
brother you know Ultra processed so I
look at my family morbidly obese
have been my entire life but many of
them have like managed to get into their
70s and I and I at the risk of
completely derailing where we were
headed I don't think people of our
generation are going to be able to look
the same as they looked and live as long
as they lived because my mom didn't get
into Ultra processed food let's say
until she was in her 20s whereas kids
now in the womb brother they're into
Ultra processed food and I think that
that 20 30 year span is going to be
devastating to People of Our Generation
like even I am so freaked out by the
fact that I know my mom was eating
terribly when she was pregnant with me
she smoked also while she was pregnant
that did not help and then uh my whole
life like I used to eat fried turkey
nuggets and french fries deep fried
turkey nuggets and french fries almost
every night you can't do that you can't
do that listen this is getting into the
fields of nutrigenomics and
nutrigenetics we have entire fields of
science looking at how each and every
bite of food that we eat impacts our
genetic expression and also how our
unique genetic makeup
leans towards certain nutrients certain
foods that work better for us versus
somebody else right now you're speaking
to this really important thing which is
what if we're doing this earlier because
there's so much of the body being made
foundational things like your brain
being made out of these compounds right
and so
but also mentioning you know your family
is very similar to mine very similar
this also speaks to something that we
look over which is the resilience of the
human body right you just said it we can
be in a state where we're probably
experiencing four different chronic
diseases and caring an insane amount of
excess body fat as well and still be
able to keep trucking along the body is
always trying to sort things out and to
fix things
if you think about something like type 2
diabetes which here in the United States
somewhere in the ballpark of about 130
million Americans have type 2 diabetes
or pre-diabetes right now a huge portion
of our population
now if you look at this condition so
we've got
dysfunction happening with our blood
sugar essentially we've got these beta
cells in our pancreas that are making
insulin right and insulin is getting
made and released in response to glucose
entering our bloodstream from the food
that we're eating primarily today we
have the ability to shuttle insane
amounts of food into our bloodstream at
one time that we never evolved with and
so insulin is going to be hyperactive
and at some point it's kind of like
it's kind of like a spam
email scenario happening where you keep
getting this insulin message over and
over and over again until the inbox the
cell is just like I'm gonna block you
I'm gonna white I'm not gonna white list
this message and it's going to down
regulate its interaction with insulin
right so now we've got all of this
glucose running while in the bloodstream
which
it's not exactly like this but a good
analogy is kind of like little shards of
glass right you can just tear stuff up
this is why we tend to have you know
when we're in this state of insulin
resistance and diabetes capillary issues
losing vision losing Limbs and things
that are further away from the core
right so where things are starting to
get a little bit more constricted start
to get torn up all right so
with that said
even though we're in the state the body
is making an adaptation
to that abnormal glucose to keep you
alive all right
what insulin resistance and diabetes is
it is the body adapting to less than
ideal conditions or circumstances to
keep this person alive when exposed to
all of this blood sugar that could kill
you all right so there's this
intelligence and Grace that the body has
to keep operating and trucking us along
because what people tend to do on the
surface is like well you know we're
still living longer no right now this
generation is the first generation and
anybody can look this up that's not
going to outlive our predecessors that
process is reversed but also with our
Innovation you would think our lifespan
would continue regardless we're not
living longer we're dying longer we're
just extending the suffering with this
Ultra processed food awareness which I'm
grateful for we can get into a little
bit of
uh
teetering back and forth because
something like olive oil is a processed
food how much can I heat it though
I'll answer that one second with with
olive oil right we've got a very simple
processing we take olives we crush the
olives with low temperature right that's
how it's traditionally done that is
processing
but it's it's minor processing versus
you taking uh
you know a couple of ears of corn and
turning it into Lucky Charms right right
like there's no connection whatsoever to
this thing and it's so riddled with
artificial colors and flavors and the
like how how can you heat olive oil to
answer that question fantastic question
traditionally We're Not Really Cooking
with it as much by the way salad
dressings putting it on bread right
these are some of the ways that would be
used traditionally
if we are cooking with it we've got to
be mindful the reason it's in dark glass
is that it's heat and light sensitive
all right
it doesn't change just because you pour
it into a pan
so just keep that in mind the common
moniker is happening to it when it's
getting heated up though is it is it
termination okay oh and also yeah it can
become rancid as well by not being
packaged correctly but olive oil is kind
of you know if you think about wines it
could stay like there was some research
that came out not too long ago that they
were finding old bottles of olive oil
like you know 100 years old or whatever
and cracking into it and it was fine I
wouldn't say it was fine personally you
know but it was edible and they didn't
die you know what I'm saying okay so I
I've heard a lot about olive oil the
benefits all of that I'm excited that
you can actually layer that on and still
get some added benefit the epithelial
lining in the blood-brain barrier which
a lot of people may not even realize so
they know they have one in their gut
only I have only heard people talking
about the blood brain barrier as a
similar epithelial lining recently so I
imagine a lot of people are unaware of
that if you're getting the breakdown in
the gut you're almost certainly getting
the breakdown of the brain so being able
to add something like olive oil and get
the effects is tremendous but I eat a
lot of olive oil but I worry I always
heat it up always and I've never been
able to get a great answer I'm assuming
it's because there's not a ton of
research that says okay you can heat it
to this point but not above but like for
instance I don't use butter in my pan or
anything like that I eat eggs most days
but I'll put olive oil as the lubricant
on the pan
but I'm scrambling eggs I mean it's it's
hot yeah am I doing myself any favors or
would I be better off with something
like ghee which is clarified butter for
those that don't know like what's the
right move there I love that you ask
questions like this because this is the
level that you're on and also a lot of
the audiences as well which is like we
want to be our very best right most
people though Tom are like
they're not thinking about their eggs in
olive oil you know what I mean like
they're eating Dunkin Donuts and like
mini muffins yeah so now we're getting
into the minutia which is you're still
so far superior so far better off by
having those eggs scrambled up in some
olive oil than you would the like now
what's the good better best practice
even with the eggs we've got to be
mindful of damaging the yolk right
through high heat there's some omega
three fatty acids there they're very
heat sensitive
and so low to moderate heating with the
olive oil fantastic and also even eggs
if you talk to a chef right somebody
who's really versed in making eggs and
omelettes they're cooking their eggs
like longer right but I know myself
probably too I'm just trying to whip
those bad boys up and you know get get
busy right but the ideal practice is to
be mindful that these compounds don't
want to get damaged by heat
but we're still so far better off doing
that than eating some Frosted Mini
Wheats right yeah
frosted many of these are so good though
Sean that's why I brought it up it
jumped right up on my spirit time no man
that's interesting okay so that's a good
angle on inflammation
um what about fat loss is uh are there
implications with olive oil are there
other things we can add we'll get to
subtracting in a minute but if there are
other things that we can add
is there something on the fat loss side
that like in my book is smarter
it was a
randomized trial they put olive oil up
against soybean oil supplementation and
also there's a study that went MCT oil
versus long chain fatty acid oil coming
from things like vegetable soybean oil
people had greater levels of weight loss
and fat loss and also improvements in
their satiety hormones by including
monosaturated fats like from olive oil
and also medium chain
fatty acids like from coconut and things
like that but also we of course MCT oil
is popping right now now if you had to
guess so knowing what you know is that
because they reduce their intake of the
soybean oil
or is it like if they kept eating the
soy bean oil and added olive oil would
they get the effect or is it that
they've replaced the soybean oil with
olive oil so they gave either group
soybean supplement soybean oil
supplement or the olive oil or you know
another trial MCT oil right they're
taking in oil exactly okay so they're
not replacing anything right they're
dieting just adding that piece in
improved fat loss that's what I thought
again so the mechanism of action or do
you have a guess yeah this goes back to
you know I mentioned this a little bit
earlier about like what you're making
your brain out of but the same thing
happens with the mitochondrion what kind
of efficiency
we are feeding our mitochondria right
and are we gumming up the system so a
good example and we actually talked
about this the last time we talked this
was published in the journal food and
nutrition research and they were looking
at the metabolic impact of a meal of
Whole Foods versus processed foods
and so they had the test subjects to
consume one of two sandwiches right so
in one part of the study they're eating
a sandwich that is quote processed foods
which is
um it was white bread and cheese product
right and so we mentioned this last time
that's craft singles yeah you know it
can't they can't legally call it Kraft
cheese it's cracked singles because
there's not enough cheese in the cheese
and and then that's the processed food
Sandwich versus a meal of Whole Food
which was multi-grain bread or whole
grain bread in cheddar cheese I again we
get into the debate that's why I started
talking about this earlier what's
processed and not this is minimally
processed cheddar cheese is like four
things craft singles is like 15 things
all right very different products and
also how long have humans had each of
these and so the the two sandwich or the
same amount of calories
same amount of proteins fats and
carbohydrates on paper they should have
the same metabolic impact
but after consuming the two different
sandwiches when the people had the
processed food sandwich they had 50
reduction in calorie expenditure calorie
burn after eating that sandwich versus
when they had the whole food meal
sandwich
and what happens is it's kind of
creating this metabolic clog it's
gumming up the system and again your
body's intelligence is just like oh I
don't know exactly what to do with this
let's tuck this away here let's it's
trying to protect us some kind of way
and it's slowing down that expenditure
of this
less than ideal substance just trying to
figure it out it's kind of creating this
confusion now
with that said this boils down to what
are you making your tissues out of and
this is one of the most important
takeaways for anybody
when you're eating food you're not just
eating food you're choosing what you're
making your cells out of every cell in
your body from your heart to your brain
is made from food we have this
we have this cognitive bias in our
reality we think we're just here
right you were literally made as I'm
looking at you I'm seeing the food that
you've eaten
that crazy yes it is mind-blowing okay
so all of my cells are turning over I am
literally what I eat but do you pay
attention to the there are some very
smart people that are like a calorie is
a calorie bra and so it this is one of
those things you're very eloquent on
this point I try not to be arrogant
about this I try to look for as you say
what am I wrong about so I do not value
myself for being right I promise you
like none of this is coming from a place
of like I know something you don't know
but I have a a like allergic reaction to
people who are like a calorie is a
calorie and there's no difference but
they're really smart people who say that
and I don't it it may just be that I'm
so ignorant I can't see past like but it
seems obvious to me that if I'm eating
uh polyunsaturated fatty acid or
polyunsaturated fats that gets stored as
polyunsaturated fatty acids that that is
going to be materially different than
another kind of fat even if they're
stored within the same fat cell
um but I don't know the ways in which
they are different so can you
are you familiar enough with their
stance to steal man that argument and
then can you tell me where what they're
missing
because if you can I absolutely love
that because when I came into this I
went to a conventional University and my
nutritional science class one of those
big Auditorium classes the first day of
class the teacher said that if you want
to manage your weight
you just need to manage calories
if I if I make you hungry enough if I
deny you of calories enough you will
lose basically all of your tissues but
you will get skinny so we know that's
true but where does that begin to break
down yes so today
again it has its place in science and
what we tend to do of course is we get
bought into an ideal we might see
results with ourselves and even with
people that we're working with but what
tends to happen is we'll ignore the
people who aren't getting the result
with our thing it happens with the very
best researchers scientists Physicians
we mean well but we tend to think that
our way is the way right like the
Mandalorian and there's so many other
versions of that and so today what we've
uncovered is that there are epic caloric
controllers there are multiple
controllers that control what calories
do in your body versus the next person
all right so one of them I just
mentioned is the quality of the food
itself is going to react differently in
your body so you might be doing a point
system or managing your calories but
you're eating processed food and
creating a
barrier in your body's ability to expend
the calories that it possibly could if
you were eating real food
we can't we can't let that go we can't
just be like that doesn't exist but we
get that tunnel vision when we're just
like calories in calories out that's it
end of story and I'm so glad you set
this up by saying these are very very
smart people but here's the thing
if we take a very smart person and we
teach them the wrong thing they become
world-class at teaching the wrong thing
all right and this happens a lot in
medicine today all right but of course
there are great Innovations there are
great things that happen but we have to
look at the results
is it working for the majority of people
and the data clearly shows that most
people who are doing a
standard calorie restriction they do
lose some weight then something happens
something happens which that something
is their metabolic rate adapts their
body's expenditure because when you cut
calories it isn't just magic fat loss
time it's going to change the way that
your thyroid is working it's going to
change the way that your adrenals are
working it's going to change the ways
your brain is working everything is
going to get affected in your body
that's hardwired for survival doesn't
give a [__] about you trying to lose
weight it's going to adapt
right but then it's just like you just
need to diet harder you need to cut more
calories have you tried a caloric
deficit right I've seen this so much to
the degree that people end up coming
into my office when I was doing clinical
work they're on 900 calories a day and
the scale is not budging and they're
broken
right they feel broken and just in tears
like I'm trying so hard why won't this
work for me and oftentimes I have the
story work before
they did this thing before and it worked
but this is us trying to say you know
what
this human body that has evolved over
millions of years
we can just operate it like a calculator
it isn't this Ultra complex highly
sophisticated you've had on Michio Kaku
I believe right Michio Kaku said the
human brain is the most complicated
organ in the known universe the most
complicated object in the known universe
and we're just like I could trick you
silly brain
right I could trick you with a little
caloric manipulation your hypothalamus
is a master gland in your brain and it's
an integration point for your endocrine
system and your nervous system okay your
nervous system is kind of
responding to the environment and
providing feedback internal and external
right and we know about the
neurotransmitters that are associated
with the nervous system so we've got
stuff that makes us feel good stuff that
makes us feel terrible stuff that makes
us feel pain all the like
the endocrine system is your hormones
these are essentially chemical
Messengers that are sending messages
these little metabolic DMS from cell to
cell to keep every cell in your body on
the same page you want the community
with good communication
communication breaks down
when people say my hormones are out of
whack they don't really know what that
means but the cellular communication is
run amok and so the things that you want
to happen are not happening
all that's getting married in this
powerful Master gland
not to mention it's responsible for
controlling your body temperature your
hunger your thirst
so many other things
and when you suddenly go into this
caloric restriction your hypothalamus
its job is to help your body to adjust
to said restriction
all right
so that part of the equation is known it
has to be honored and the way that
people adjust or their body adapts is
going to change from person to person we
can't just berate people like you just
need to cut your calories that's not
right thank you guys so much we hit 3
million subscribers on YouTube I cannot
be more grateful to all of you that help
make this happen and now we have a
social ecosystem of roughly 10 million
people I cannot believe it guys thank
you so much for being the most
incredible community on the internet few
years ago Lisa and I set out to tell
entertaining stories of empowerment in a
global Community was born thank you to
the viewers the listeners and students
over at impact Theory University
incredible interview guests that have
really helped the show become worth
watching thank you guys so much to
everybody here at impact Theory thank
you 3 million times for being so
legendary all right guys peace
and the rate at which it happens to
different people that's another glaring
thing like is everybody going to be you
know is this going to be like an
assembly line thing no everybody's going
to be different because we're all
different
and so a great another one of these epic
caloric controllers I took a moment to
talk about the hypothalamus for example
this is one of the great things it's
about education and empowerment right
because even folks who are you know
really they've anchored into calories
and calories out they still want to help
people and that's wonderful we're not
saying this is wrong it's this and you
have to understand and respect the
complexity of the human body and pay
attention to your audience who's saying
I did what you're saying and it didn't
work for me right because we tend to not
we tend to tend to want to block that
out with that said researchers at Yale
it's pretty smart people all right
researchers at Yale found that
everybody well not everybody a lot of
people today have heard of the vagus
nerve right connecting the brain and the
gut this gut brain connection and the
gut itself is often called the second
brain or the enteric nervous system
there's a tremendous amount of
neurotransmit there's so much action
happening in the gut it's intelligent
Force itself so with the researchers at
Yale University found was that the human
brain is basically
keeping tabs on it's kind of like a
governing entity with the gut and based
on your brain and your gut's assessment
of your caloric needs and your nutrient
needs your brain can tell your gut to
decrease or increase the assimilation of
calories from your food that's that's
crazy
but it makes sense because your body has
this intelligence
now the question is if I'm riddled with
if I've already got all of this caloric
energy stored on my body
why would my body still allow me to
assimilate so much of this caloric
energy and this gets into the breakdown
of that gut the breakdown of that
intelligence between the brain and the
gut this gets into food scientists being
able to manipulate these systems and
things to go Haywire right
but with that said if we are eating real
Whole Foods and eating foods that really
resonate well with our body it's very
difficult in the first place to overeat
those foods like this is getting into
more of the practicality not just using
looking at the human body as a glorified
calculator but that it has its
intelligence because I know you've done
this
try to do this as well I know a lot of
guys do we might try to put on a little
size right and we're eating a caloric uh
abundance we're eating more than enough
but it's just so difficult to put on
that extra size that extra weight you
got the dirty bulk makes it easier it
doesn't say I can put on fat nice and
easy okay yeah muscle is a whole
different thing the dirty bulk is easier
but if you're doing that with real food
you know sweet potatoes and high protein
foods fish and things like that
miserable it is yes
not only is it difficult eating so much
it can be miserable and I was fascinated
by this topic so I looked into it a
little bit more and I believe the
researchers are based in Kansas City
but what they found was essentially that
our tongue even the human tongue is
ridiculously intelligent but I was
wondering why do we suddenly not have a
taste for something right we're eating a
food and then it's just like uh right
something that's good that first bite a
few bites in you're just like it's not
not as attractive but it slowly goes
away
we're our taste buds literally change
the proteins that we're producing as
well change as we're eating in your
mouth in our mouth absolutely and over
time
the overall palette because you know
you've heard this as well and probably
experiences are are cravings and our
desire for certain foods changes like we
could just lose our desire to do what we
were doing which I was getting fast food
in 300 plus days a year if I had a buck
I'm pulling up in that in that drive
through right the drive through diet you
know I made it for years but now it's
just like I have no attraction
whatsoever to that food and if I eat it
it tastes so fake so fake there's this
intelligence that's been nurtured but if
I kept eating that stuff guess what's
going to happen it's going to switch
over and I'm gonna crave these
artificial things especially these
chemicals you know um
artificial colors flavors you want to
talk a little bit about artificial
flavors
so this was a huge breakthrough in food
science when researchers did the thing
that kind of like what we're talking
about today everything breaks down into
chemistry right so a certain flavor is
just a compilation of certain chemicals
it's a chemical complex and so using a
gas chromatograph they could identify
the flavors the chemicals that make the
flavor of strawberry per se and now we
can take that strawberry flavor and add
it to other [__] right so now we got
strawberry flavored ice cream no
strawberries necessary strawberry
flavored soda and candy all the things
and it might not taste exactly like a
strawberry
but it's just enough to muddy up the
metabolic Waters and confuse your system
right and so because you're saying that
my body will react to those cues in some
way that even though it isn't a
strawberry it's tripping enough of those
signals that my body anticipates a
strawberry this is where some of the
magic happens right here because we
evolved attaching certain nutrients and
caloric density to certain flavors
again this data is not just coming from
us it's coming from our ancestors
and so when we're getting a certain
flavor note without that even sweet
if we get a Sweet Sensation but it's not
coming along with the expected nutrients
and or caloric density we think we could
just trick our body
but now a recent study just came out you
might have seen it getting passed around
looking at changes that happen with the
microbiome and association with
artificial sweeteners not to say again
that they can't be used to great
success for some people but you can't
think that the body and the brain is
stupid like I'm going to give you this
sweet taste with none of the side
effects and one of the studies that I
put in each smarter as well found that
the consumption of you know like
sucralose for example increase the
production of insulin all right it's not
supposed to
but insulin's going up what happens when
insulin goes up insulin is that lock and
key to open your fat cells up to store
more [__] right we think we can trick
the system but our bodies are far
smarter than us and I started the show
saying that like there's so much that we
don't know and we're trying to figure
stuff out we don't want to act like
we've got it all figured out when it
comes to like artificial sweeteners for
example
they have their place it's cool we can
come up with this stuff but we have to
keep an open mind that it might not be
exactly what we think it is
I'm going to reframe it a little bit
tell me if this lands I get the impulse
to say that the body is smart
but it might be more useful for people
to understand that the body's
kind of dumb and it's lagging behind
because what it is is you had a blind
watchmaker over millions of years of
evolution and the people that started
secreting insulin or whatever when they
put it in their mouth
they survive longer than the people that
waited until it hit the gut and actually
got digested and by then it's too late
and your you know your sugars are
elevated for too long and so you end up
dying younger than other people
and because of that now as you're you
know in a modern context you have all
this fake food your body doesn't realize
that oh there's a difference between
this thing which is giving me these
signals which is why it tastes so good
and we're like oh my God this is amazing
because Evolution told me yeah eat
strawberries eat these sweet things
because they're only here in this narrow
window as it's leading up to Winter you
need to put on a little fat and so one I
trigger a response that's more likely to
make you fat from things that taste like
a fruit and but the reality is that the
body doesn't see the difference between
this engineered thing which shouldn't
trigger all of those responses but still
does and this is why people should wait
until the end because I have something
tied to this that you've said I think
it's brilliant and it's really going to
unlock something for people but I am
going to make people wait till the end
for it
um but that to me once I understood okay
I get it my body thinks because of
evolution my body thinks these mean x y
z but they don't mean that anymore and
so now I'm getting myself into maybe a a
better bit of trouble but still a bit of
trouble than if I were just shoveling
the full sugar version of these things
in my mouth yeah I love that it's such a
it's a great balancing actor look at
let's look at the other end of the
Spectrum which is the body's just dumb
and just responding to these inputs
and the reality is probably going to be
somewhere in the middle here as with
most things but you know just taking
that on like this is how our system can
be manipulated clearly we have brilliant
scientists who were able to you know
again use a gas chromatograph and break
down that flavor complex but also create
things where we have this Vanishing
caloric energy yeah right where we eat
I was just talking to my youngest son
about this because he was asking about
teeth like
um if something came up about wisdom
teeth right and I just got into this
conversation about it that you know a
lot of American adults like our wisdom
teeth don't come in right and they're
all usually impacted or they're crooked
or whatever and it didn't used to be
that way like our all of our teeth would
just come in normally right but a part
of that my wife brought it up was she's
from Kenya right and so like they grew
up eating sugar cane for example like
chewing on stuff having hard stuff chew
on but it was more so her mom's
generation with her generation to get
more and more processed food coming in
right and also very low tier
carbohydrate-based Foods versus the
hunter-gatherer like they have the
Messiah there as well who would still
have this husband Tree and they're doing
like the the milk and that kind of thing
then they've got another tribe who is
out with the fish and that kind of thing
better Dental Health both areas right
and so we're getting this conversation
about not chewing hard stuff and he he
had this thing come up like what about
like chips and stuff like that that's
hard that's but it's like one crunch
like one good crunch then it turns into
sauce yeah it turns into mush and it's
this Vanishing caloric density where the
brain you got this big FL intense flavor
and you've got this chewing action that
takes place but then it disappears so
our bodies get tricked in a sense going
back to it can be a little bit slow it
can be Lloyd Christmas
right it could be a Lloyd Christmas
version of itself that's dumb and dumber
for anybody who's not seen the movie
um but that aspect of the body being
tricked into thinking it's consuming
less calories than it actually is
because hey it disappears it's not a big
input coming into my gut
right so we have brilliant scientists
who figure this stuff out
at the end of the day though the human
body is going to take its do
and it's going to figure out or stop
trying to figure stuff out when it keeps
being faced with all this abnormality
you know all of these things that it's
never been exposed to that's what we're
seeing now as a society we're the
sickest Society
in the really the documented history of
humanity we have the highest rate of
chronic diseases ever known to man and
we're supposed to be so much better than
this
we are so smart we're so technologically
advanced why are we so sick
you know this should be one of the
things that we think about every day
like
this doesn't make sense and to have this
generation be the first generation to
not outlive our predecessors that our
lifespan is reversing that should put
off all kinds of red flags for us to say
hey
if we're going to be results oriented
something's not working
something in this equation is not
working could it be that we're trying to
trick our bodies into doing the things
we wanted to do versus US understanding
the things we evolve with and bringing
in more of that
can I give you my my favorite quote from
Thomas Soul please do the last 30 years
have been marked by exchanging what
worked for what sounds good
as somebody who was in the food industry
I can tell you we were breaking
ourselves in half trying to like do
right by the people eating it but
science changes and so who knows like 10
years from now we may realize things we
were doing didn't make any sense but we
really were trying like sincerely even
just the the right metabolic answer over
profitability and we made decisions that
cost us hundreds of millions of dollars
so I put my money where my mouth is on
that
but inevitably time will look back and
say uh you should have done it like this
you should have done it like that I
recognize that but
we make things that don't necessarily
work because hey we want to drive the
cost of food down hey we want to make
sure that the farmers that are making
the things that make food taste better
and people like it more and you know
therefore they will eat them we want to
make sure that we subsidize that and so
it's like these string of things but I
remember back at Quest that this was
still in the height of fat is going to
kill you days yeah and we were like no
you guys have this all wrong like fat is
going to be this huge thing this was
that I had never heard of ketogenics
when we first started Quest and we
started learning about it I'm like oh my
God like this is amazing could have
cancer implications like all this stuff
but this is all happening as the
government is like we're going to tax
food with fat and like they were going
crazy on anti-fat and we're like whoa
like crazy you may mean well I'm
perfectly willing to accept you actually
believe what you're saying but you are
moving Us in the wrong direction and so
when I look at
age or the length of life expectancy now
going backwards
and I think but they don't intend to
have that effect but damn we replaced a
lot of things that worked for things
that we wish would work but don't
actually so at what point do we have to
hold ourselves accountable
Pharma food like at some point
somebody's got to say this [__] isn't
working yeah it takes a lot of Courage
to you know we all have our biases it's
important to come into the conversation
with that and be willing to continuously
question your biases that might mean
that you're going to be wrong and here's
one of the other things especially about
food science you're going to find stuff
that validates
two totally different perceptions
but what I like to do is like what is
the majority of data say and also my
biases towards what have humans been
doing the longest but even still I have
to be open to the fact that maybe a
Twinkie might activate some kind of
yeah like again we can become telepathic
or something I'm hoping to go on record
to say Twinkies do not do that yes
you're 100 right and even that I'm
joking because you're right yeah you
have got to open yourself up to that
yeah and it's beautiful because what
happens is this really interesting thing
takes place where you start being right
a lot more when you're willing to be
wrong and proactively looking for ways
that you're wrong
right now we're living at the Golden Age
of my way is the way and this is coming
from the top down in society and the
bottom up
and so
I I love this piece because you know
just again what we've experienced the
last couple of years the most obvious
thing was not addressed and I said this
at the very beginning
and I was looking at the data coming out
of Italy and seeing that upwards of
around 89 of the folks hospitalized
had one or more pre-existing chronic
diseases and I was like oh [__] like
this is our Super Bowl moment this is
our time we've got to focus on getting
our citizens healthier
the instant argument comes up of we
can't get people healthier overnight
right
and so let's not talk about it was that
sort of the underlying the the problem
is when fear takes over as well you know
that's another part of the ingredient
the recipe that can make us ignore
essential basic things but here's the
thing I wanted to communicate if you
look at the vast amount of peer-reviewed
data that we have we can absolutely
derange our metabolism in a day or we
can improve it in a day right so just
for example one night of sleep
deprivation guess what's going to happen
to your immune system guess what's going
to happen to your insulin sensitivity
guess what's going to happen to your
leptin and all the things there's going
to become dysfunction opening increasing
the risk of you getting sick period
and so Appalachian State University
researchers found that simply going for
a 20-minute walk
instantly boosts immune parameters most
notably neutrophils natural killer cells
just going for a walk one rock but this
is a it's a short-term boost but what if
you have that practice integrated right
not to say that this is the end-all
be-all or some kind of like Shield
against a viral infection
but
here's the thing that we we did what we
typically do we have a problem we try to
find a drug for it right
so I had my eye on the data coming out
of Italy and I was just being a voice of
reason and logic like let's stay
balanced in this so we don't
we don't Venture into the ridiculous
but two a year later I get a study from
the CDC I know people at the CDC and
I'll tell you most of them the vast
majority pretty much everybody that I
know with these entities they really do
want to help people there can be of
course decision makers and people in the
process
that
have some what we tend to do again if
there's a nefarious outcome
but money's tied to it or the reputation
all the things they make tough decisions
right so I keep trying to validate and
hold a space for people to be good
people so I'm coming into it with that
now here's what what I got
this was published in July
of 2021.
huge meta-analysis looking at the data
from over 800 United States hospitals
and over 540 000 covid-19 patients and
we'll put the study for people you can
put that in the show notes if you like
as well because seeing is believing so
compiling this huge database of people
what they found was that the number one
risk factor for death was obesity and
the thing is we can have this
justification where people won't do it
look at how we were galvanized to do
things
I just went to the gym today and I see
all the stickers on the floor stay six
feet apart stay safe
oh guess what people were doing they
were doing the things if it was coming
from a place of authority with a little
bit of Science and encouragement that
fear could have been used as a tool for
real empowerment
right do you think there was a perfect
storm because I think so part of it
feels like
a hundred percent
so many people like confronted with
their own mortality still will not
change their diet there's a book called
change or die which highlights how few
people will actually make the necessary
changes when even the change they have
to make is deadly simple they still
won't do it so there's that but it also
coincided right as we were getting to
the point where you can't call somebody
fat or obese that's shaming them in some
way and so now it's like people are
called onto the carpet for saying that
you're overweight you've got this whole
movement of healthy at any size and it's
coming right as we're like we have to do
something right now and we know that
people won't change and you put all that
together and years in and it's still
like considered almost like
you're being mean it all came to a head
at the same time right you know having
that conversation so blaming so you're
blaming fat people for the problem right
no we're just talking about reality
we're talking about science and
doing the work where I'm sitting across
the table from a patient and they're
coming in they're dealing with something
to be able to look them in the eye I've
seen this so many times I haven't met
one person who didn't want to be healthy
all right this is a dip this is a
difference of course there's this like
people won't do the thing we use that in
in medicine so much that people won't
listen
you just have to get better at your job
because there's a way
and so it's finding out what is that
person's
motivations you know what it what are
their what are the what is the leverage
point that you can find because within
that human is the potential for so much
but of course what happens is we get
into a place of complacency
we have a perception that that's way
harder than me sitting here having my
Doritos which I used to go to 7-Eleven
open the Doritos pump chili and cheese
into the bag Shake It Up all right so
that's so much easier than me going for
a walk every day why on Earth would I
put myself in that discomfort but I'm
creating this physiological discomfort
and disease in my body all the while
that is going to force me to make
decisions right so it's just like you
get to choose your heart you get to
choose your difficult most people are
never even presented with that idea
right they're never even presented with
that idea and we're so disempowered in
our culture and also we have all of we
have a societal revolution of
convenience and complacency and
disempowerment and lack of movement we
have a society that has made everything
so accessible if we wanted to we we
didn't we wouldn't have to get up right
now to get food sat in front of us
whereas our ancestors there was just so
labor intensive just to get a meal
blessing but also potential curse all
right we have to keep this in context so
this story that people won't do the
thing with motivations people did [__]
that they never thought they would do
the last two years we can really look
out and see that at the end of the day
you know if we can provide
more empowerment science-based
empowerment
and create a culture right now we've
created a culture of sickness and so to
be healthy you're weird as [__]
to be the healthy person
what state are we in where it's weird to
be healthy right and a lot of people
have seen the the study that came out
about a year ago maybe it was two years
ago but this big meta-analysis and they
were looking at the metabolic health of
the United States citizens and they
found that 88 of the United States
citizens are metabolically unhealthy how
many 88
good to see you to put in the show notes
for everybody as well and again
if you look at it's no longer the
exception versus the rule the rule is
the rule is poor health and disease all
right so let's go back actually to that
study I mentioned from the CDC
the CDC was getting tagged in everything
related to covet but I was actually
reading the studies looking at the
references not window dressing looking
at it even an abstract sometimes can be
misleading
540 000 over 540 000 covid-19 patients
over 800 U.S Hospitals number one risk
factor for death was obesity the
question is why is that Pro and state
that pro-inflammatory state of
inflammation we're pre-inflamed what is
covid-19 in inflammatory condition
so you get us you already got a bonfire
going in your body now we come in and we
throw some extra fuel on the fire what
do you think is going to happen bonfire
just for people that are really getting
into the nitty-gritty is the immune
system is already Yes hyperacting
kicking off the cytokines we now know
the idea of a cytokine storm so you have
the immune system attacking the body
itself it's kind of like uh if you have
a fly in your house if you hit it with a
fly swatter all is well if you bring in
a shotgun you start doing damage if
you're bringing 150 shotguns and you
just start obliterating everything
you're gonna have massive collateral
damage and so you're getting this
the attack of the the virus with all
these shotguns and now you're just
tearing the body apart as you try to end
the virus exactly and we can see this
with you know other metrics we can
measure homocysteine C-reactive protein
we could see that inflammation is a
problem in the body and this is a
consistent thing we see when we're
venturing into being overweight and
obese the here's the second leading risk
factor for death number one was obesity
number two was fear and anxiety Related
Disorders
yeah I had never heard that until I
started researching for this episode I
was like what how can I get it but
that's that should be that should have
been everywhere
how in the world could the second
leading risk factor for death from covid
published by the CDC be anxiety and
fear-related disorders what is what the
hell is going on here what's the
connection at that time when the study
came out I had already been sharing so
much data on
psychoneuroimmunology on the
psychosomatic effects of covid all
published data like we know this happens
we have entire field of psychoneuro
Immunology understanding how our mind
and our thoughts affect our immune
system right so if we're in a state
where we're riddled with fear like we've
been the last two years bombarded fear
without context not to say that there
isn't something for us to be concerned
about and protect ourselves but to get
to the place where we're debilitated and
we're frightened just at the sight of
another human being guess what's going
to happen you're going to be pumping out
all of these catabolic stress-related
hormones and it's just going to be
hammering away at your immune system
especially over time we didn't just have
a week of it two weeks a few months
years what do you think's gonna happen
it's not good so that was the second
leading risk factor for death
the third was diabetes and it's related
complications again going back I can't
believe that anxiety and fear outpace
diabetes yeah crazy that's fascinating
to me I would have for so long it seemed
like everybody was lumping those two
together obesity and diabetes
so it's very interesting to me that they
seem to have a slightly different
mechanism of action so that I I would
have thought the diabetes would be even
more life-threatening than just Garden
variety obesity why do you think they're
flipped yeah that's such a good question
and by the way I want to throw this
little bit of data out here too so this
is published by the CDC as well
healthcare workers obviously had a great
level of exposure so they're a great
data set and plus controlled environment
we can get better feedback
89 of healthcare workers who were
hospitalized with covid-19 had at least
one pre-existing chronic disease and
over 75 right around 75 percent of them
obese okay so this isn't again
sort of it might be a correlation we
know this is is the issue
and so with obesity and diabetes these
two they do tend to come hand in hand
you know they're like they're paired up
all right they're they've met on Tinder
they're you know what I mean whatever
but
there are different metabolic situations
happening all right because somebody can
be
not a they can have type 2 diabetes and
not be obese and also people who are
obese don't necessarily have to have
diabetes this gets back to this very
important foundational understanding
that we're all different and our body's
metabolism we have a unique metabolic
fingerprint and how our body adapts to
things is can be dramatically different
from one person to another but what we
do is we tend to put these umbrella
diagnoses on people right so they get
the diabetes label if they have you know
the fasting blood sugar is too high or
hemoglobin A1c it's too high whatever
the case might be you're diabetic that's
it
no two people have the same diabetes
ever
because they're a unique human entity
and everything is different in that body
there are of course similarities where
we can classify people and provide a
treatment but oftentimes it's that
standard of care and this is why we suck
at fixing it because we're not taking
the person into consideration another
thing with battling this issue is we're
fighting against ourselves you know
we're fighting this internal battle
and there's a lack of respect like our
fat cells this is my biased uh our fat
sales are smart too of course again they
could be dumb but they're really
intelligent at helping to Keep Us Alive
through our Evolution they were
developed they developed in such a way
that they can keep us alive during times
of famine
well now we're living in a famine That
Never Comes not even remotely close as a
matter of fact it's anti-famine right
and our fat cells have the capacity to
expand their volume by a thousand times
a thousand times
crazy it's insane
so now the problem is as that's
happening it's sending out that distress
signal that something is wrong here like
I have too much stored in this system
there's some kind of infection something
is breaking down but here's the beauty
when we start to
move away from the behavior patterns
that's causing the problem the body
knows how to fix itself it knows how to
sort the stuff out right this is where
we can get in the conversation about a
caloric restriction or the like but the
caloric restriction
naturally happens when we're eating
nutrient-dense Foods because it starts
to cover all of these bases these
metabolic bases because even the process
of fat loss itself which is it's lost on
so many people
there are key nutrients that are
involved in the process even the
mitochondria itself
our mitochondria is the end destination
we have lipolysis where the fat cell
lets go of its contents but that [__]
can get reabsorbed all right so
lipolysis is a step now it needs to get
shuttled to the mitochondria to actually
be used as fuel right we've got
uh cellular respiration and beta
oxidation
so now that that's getting utilized
here's the here's the crazy part
the mitochondria
really are all of ourselves there I
can't think of anything that isn't
dependent upon the sodium potassium pump
these key electrolytes that enable our
all of our cells to do all the [__] they
do right magnesium is also another
critical electrolyte in our in our
mitochondria being able to
we have in this kind of uh mitochondrial
Genesis creating new mitochondria we
need magnesium to help it to do that job
and last point this is so cool when I
was in my University classes I was
taught that the energy currency of the
body ATP everybody knows ATP
ATP
no that's not the bioactive form the
bioactive form is when ATP is binded
with magnesium that's when it's actually
bioactive able to do [__]
I don't know this is why electrolytes
these key nutrients are so important so
if we get dogmatic and we just like cut
your calories
are you deficient in these key
electrolytes shit's not going to work as
good what if we start stacking
conditions in people's favor using our
primitive understanding of nutrition
with trying to treat the body like a
calculator but also adding on the
advanced stuff which is epic caloric
controllers
so we can really start to get people
healthy Tom bilyu here announcing my new
espanol episodes on YouTube and podcast
we are committed to spreading the impact
Theory message of empowerment at scale
to as many people in our growing Global
Community as possible so we've taken
some of our best It episodes with some
amazing guests and dubbed them into
Spanish language tell your friends and
family start watching Tom bilyu and
espanol muchas gracias be legendary
foreign
gets really complicated there was there
was something you said earlier that I
want to go back to around the idea of
how much your mind your psychology
influences things but I also want to be
clear so when I say that the body is
dumb that's probably a more useful way
to think about it but I also believe
that if you want to believe in God look
inside the cell like every time I look
at how cells function which is way over
my head but even the parts that I can
grasp are so terrifyingly complicated
that you're like wow it is hard to
believe that we just like came to that
so it's it's pretty intense but
now applying that to the mind it's
really incredible how powerful the mind
is and when I was researching you
you were talking about a study where
they gave people the same Shake it's the
same Shake but they told people
different stories about those shakes
walk us through that because this was
startling to me in terms of somebody
trying to uh figure out this complex
game of weight loss perfect yeah so this
was a study coming out of Stanford at
the time and the lead research was Ilia
crumb and she wanted to find out if our
thoughts might affect our metabolism
and so they Blended up a big batch of
Milkshakes
for study participants to come by and on
some of the milkshakes even though they
were all calorically the same amount
they slapped the label on
some of the Milkshakes that said 140
calorie sensible milkshake right quote
sensible right and
even though they were 380 calories and
some of the other ones they slept on a
label that said
620 calorie indulgent milkshake right
and so they allow test participants to
consume them they were running a hormone
panel to see what was going on with
their biochemistry and so here's what
happened when folks were consuming the
indulgent shake that they thought was a
high calorie indulgent milkshake
their ghrelin levels which ghrelin is
this kind of glorified hunger hormone
that drives us to seek food seek
nutrition seed caloric density seek key
nutrients it creates a situation where
we are driven towards food
when they had the indulgent Shake
their ghrelin levels dropped as if they
had three times more calories than they
actually did wow all right so
essentially because they believed they
were consuming a lot of calories
something that was super indulgent
their gorillin levels responded ghrelin
also plays a big role in metabolism
overall and Metabolism of fat
their ghrelin levels and their desire to
eat dropped as if they had three times
more calories than they actually did on
the other side the sensible milkshake
and even again keep in mind all the
milkshakes are the same amount of
calories 380 calories when people had
the sensible milkshake their gorillin
levels barely budged at all
crazy non-significant okay so these
folks what's going to tend to happen is
you're going to be hungry sooner after
even though you had more calories than
you thought you had
ghrelin didn't change okay and this
speaks to again
every thought that we have creates
correlating chemistry in our bodies
instantaneously it's happening 24 7
always will never stop
that's the part of medicine in the last
couple of generations there's been the
separation between mind and body and is
the most ignorant thing because you
cannot possibly separate the two
and so understanding and again pointing
people back to their choice and your
ability to choose the thoughts that you
want to think for example
we can tell ourselves we can basically
Joe dispenza you are the placebo so
after I read the study I immediately
thought of him and I really got it
we can tell ourselves that this meal is
incredibly nourishing and indulgent even
though it might be a low calorie meal
right so when people are doing the
calorie restriction thing and they might
not be happy with the fact that they're
eating this you know low calorie salad
but telling themselves
and this gets into the debate like are
we lying are we like faking it till we
make it doesn't matter you're changing
your biochemistry and your body works
even if you're telling it to yourself
like if I know that it's a 380 calorie
Shake can I tell myself it's 160
calories or you know that it's the
indulgent so that I stop being hungry
great question because we know the
greatest effects come when it's coming
from an authority figure
right not surprising so another study
that aliacrum and her team did was a
skin prick test
and basically they gave people you know
they prick their skin and created this
reaction histamines kind of skin rash
would come up and then they brought in
researchers to tell them that they're
going to apply an ointment and either
and it's going to be in an Agonist or an
antagonist it's going to either make the
skin rash better or it's going to go
away okay
and so as study participants we're given
the the cream that was a non-treatment
there was no
treatment fact or are active ingredients
in this cream that can do anything all
right but the test subjects who rub the
cream Believing by their physician by
the research or by the scientists that
this would help their their rash go away
and start to go away within 10 minutes
it's bananas the study participants who
had the
the antagonist cream where it's going to
get worse
the skin rash got worse within 10
minutes
now here's the thing the degree of
change how quickly it changed and how
effective it was was based on the study
participants belief about
how intelligent
their practitioner was
how qualified they were their aptitude
their faith in them impacted whether or
not the rash changed house and how fast
it changed right so
keep this in mind what what usually
happens is we Outsource our thinking
for our bodies to other people
and I know this deeply because this was
how I got into this field in the first
place I had no intentions on working in
health and wellness I it just wasn't in
my perception
but
when I went into that position
experiencing some leg pain
and he had me get an MRI of my spine
first of all I didn't even know why I
was getting MRI of my spine when my leg
hurt got so disconnected from how this
entity works and I go in to see him and
he puts the MRI up and he's looking at
it with me and he tells me I have these
two ruptured discs and severe
degeneration L4 L5 S1
and I'm just like I'm like I'm a kid I'm
20 years old I'm like okay what do we do
let's go what do we do to fix it
and he looks at me like whoa you know it
kind of even pumps his hand like this
like pump your brakes kid and he says
son you have the spine of an 80 year old
Jesus this is unfortunately something
that's incurable
but we're going to help you we're going
to get you some medication we're going
to help you to manage this it was a key
word he said we're gonna help you manage
this
um untreatable uncurable uncurable
condition
it's only downhill from here but he's
going to help me manage it
and
when I shared this with you before I I
didn't really because I've been thinking
about this the last couple years I had
some extra time Tom
I was like
I asked him a question that I believed
prior that I had no grounds to ask him
which is
is this do or is there anything I can do
should I change the way that I'm eating
I asked him that question had no grounds
for it so I thought should I change the
way I'm eating should I change the way
I'm exercising and of course he said
this has these are the exact words this
has nothing to do with what you're
eating but then he wrote me a
prescription to eat some pills yeah
right
but
after thinking about it again and again
and again that nutritional science class
that I had
was before this happened this was almost
two years before I was like 17 18 in my
first
uh nutritional science class which was a
prerequisite on the pre-med track I
didn't have to take it but I thought
nutrition was about Fitness
and my teacher was overweight all right
and so when I saw him I'm like he can't
really teach me how to be fit just so
like I never said it and never really
said the words to myself but just I
realized that I had this little
disconnection of trust right and so
I had this
in my memory bank that nutrition matters
but
when when I asked that question for him
to give me that immediate feedback that
nutrition food doesn't matter in a
disease state
my doctor was not just overweight he was
obese and I remember him leaning over on
me right and just like
he was clearly not well and he's
probably doing the things that he
believed to be effective he's not just
you know not trying to not be healthy
right but in that moment what happened
to me was the nocebo effect right giving
someone a negative injunction from an
authority figure that things are going
to get worse
just like that skin prick test but
globally like for myself I went from a
nuisance of a pain to Chronic
debilitating pain within a couple of
weeks
because I believed I am unhelpable my
life is over
right and so I carried that with me day
after day for two years seeking out
multiple which I always recommend people
if you get a bad Bill of news please
seek out another opinion
getting a diagnosis it's only the same
like lit bar for bar the same diagnosis
around 20 of the time for physician to
physician all right now I'm talking
about clear difference but just in
general
you know 20 30 40 time there's going to
be some
play plays within that diagnosis that
are going to be different
seek that out but here's the thing I
learned over time
if you're going to seek out another
perspective don't just seek out the same
type of thinking
Einstein he had this wonderful statement
that's attributed to him that we can't
solve a problem from the same level of
thinking that created the problem right
and so I applied that even in the the
help that I would implore people to seek
out like ask somebody with a different
way of thinking about this thing right
but I didn't I didn't know that piece of
data at the time so I went to the same
kind of conventional thing and each time
I'm heartbroken leaving there and I'm
leaving there with another drug celebrex
was popping at the time so I was on
Celebrex
and I got I got Celebrex from the second
guy
eventually get sleeping medication
eventually you know the list goes on and
on I found my little own
over-the-counter plus prescription
cocktail to knock me out at night
because I'm in so much pain
you see this is where it gets
interesting because you've got the
age-old recommendation like thousands of
years old let food be thy medicine
uh Hippocrates I think it was that said
that all disease starts in the gut
and so we've known this stuff for a long
time and this goes back to that idea of
replacing what works for what sounds
good so drugs are powerful man like when
you get a drug that really works like if
you've ever had a bad headache and you
take Tylenol or Advil it is awesome it
is awesome and I've thought you know a
dozen times more I'm sure that I've
taken it and thought
I'm so glad I live in an age where I can
actually get medicine that has this kind
of impact because it's really powerful
so I get how people end up getting
confused but man have you got to really
look at the data and so rarely are
people actually looking at was this
effective did this actually work yeah
yeah
this gets us into this really important
part of the conversation which is I had
a conversation with Dr John Abramson and
he's a professor at Harvard and he's
been
huge and it was not his intention to be
involved in so much Drug Company
litigation pharmaceutical company
litigation and he was just brought in as
an expert witness one time and then just
kind of got pulled into that universe
and so he's under so many different ndas
and things like that he can't talk about
a lot of details but some of the
outcomes that we've seen even in the
vioxx Scandal that took place
if I I could have been put on bioxides
at that time I was put on Celebrex vioxx
killed affirmed in the data over 40 000
Americans affirmed in the data over
forty thousand we're talking about the
low end
killed them from this drug that
again according to the guy who was
involved in the damn case all right
Merck knew about the dangers they saw in
the data in their in their clinical
trials they still put the drug out
because hey these non-steroidal
anti-inflammatories are hot right now we
got to put ours out right and so again
like there's these little brushes with
fate that I have and specifically he
even shares some of the stories in his
book that you know young people were
dying right so like
uh one of the stories that he shared was
a athlete you know she hit her head and
she was like having headaches they gave
her vioxx she ended up freaking having a
stroke and dying you know it's so crazy
but we got to keep this in mind merc's
doing better than ever they killed 40
000 Americans we could argue
intentionally
they knew the dangers and they put the
drug out and not to mention all the
stuff they did to try to hide it that's
why they were hit with such a huge
lawsuit the fines all the stuff but
these fines to them are like
it's nothing to them like they actually
have
counts just kind of like for the
lawsuits like it's already set aside
they have the most powerful legal teams
in the world
so with that said knowing so many people
who work at pharmaceutical companies
mostly good people people they're just
trying to they're trying to serve
they're trying to help people they
really believe in the mission but
they're not in the lab they're not
looking at the data they're not paying
attention to the fact that our
physicians are not when we go to
physician
we think that there's their medical
school training for this particular drug
they're prescribing
the vast majority of time they're
educated on that drug by sales rep
sales rep is educating your doctor on a
drug and they have the chance if they
want to to look at the peer-reviewed
data because that's how a drug gets Pub
you know approved by the FDA as part of
the process they have this peer review
process but here's another thing that
John showed me that blew my mind I
couldn't believe it
most of the drug trials that are
published in our most prestigious
journals the review board most of them
never actually see the real clinical
trial data they get a summary from the
[__] drug company
who's actually looking at the trial data
the FDA isn't doing that they don't do
that
and a little not so fun fact that I've
really been trying to press into culture
because again we need to check these
systems so that when drugs are necessary
we have safety the FDA over 75 percent
of their scientific review budget is
funded by drug companies our FDA is
supposed to be regulating and checking
keeping in check drug companies are
funded by those same drug companies
because they pay for fees these user
fees the Advent of user fees is a recent
thing that took place all under the
guise of getting drugs we need more
drugs
we need drugs to people faster the FDA
is like we need money
so drug companies like we'll give you
the money to get the get more employees
more computers whatever you need make
the process faster user fees now but
here's the thing Tom it's not just 75
percent of their scientific review
budget the fda's overall budget 50 of it
is coming from drug companies
we have like it doesn't take
Michio Kaku
hey a brilliant level thinker to see
like there's a huge conflict of interest
here this is dangerous but for me
there's still a still surface I dug more
publishing the journal science one of
our most prestigious journals
they look at the process of scientific
review for a drug
to see are not just the entity of the
FDA itself but are individuals at the
FDA itself being compromised by drug
companies
and so what they found was that
yeah I know I've spent too much time
with you online I know the punchline
this is rough what they discovered was
that when a new drug is brought up for
the review process
The Physician advisors who are on the
board for approving this approval
process
end up getting paid by a drug company
who's involved in that clinical trial
almost 40 percent of the time they
receive a payment from that same drug
company or a competitor
okay now how is this legal it's a
post-hoc payment so they're not paying
them and then getting the thing it might
be six months later right it might be
nine months later they're getting either
cash they're getting a grant they're
getting they're getting money and this
is literally there are cases where
Millions
hundreds of thousands thousands of
dollars
how is this even possible and what's
supposed to be the gold standard for
drug regulation in the world it's so
riddled with layers of corruption
that even the good people who are trying
to get good products helpful products to
people is being compromised at every
level last part here I gotta share in
2020 two-thirds because again how is
this all happening
why is in Congress or a senate why
aren't our leaders going after these
drug companies in this process and
addressing this corruption in 2020
two-thirds of United States Congress
members received a check from a drug
company
whoa now that one I didn't know so
it's the question is how can we get this
sick
how can we be this disconnected
why are we so mentally unwell the number
one cause of death right now here in the
United States Tom for people between the
age of 18 and 45 our Prime our Prime of
Life years the number one cause of death
right now is fentanyl
really yes number one cause of death not
just overdose specifically Fentanyl
why isn't this you you know your [__]
why doesn't everybody know this so I've
I've started hearing about fentanyl in
the last I don't know maybe a year 18
months I'm probably way behind the curve
on that uh
what is fentanyl and opioid yeah it's in
that family of opioids okay but it's a
it's a synthetic opioid and is it used
in the medical system that's where it
started it's where it got to start and
they're great documentaries on this
absolutely and this question is why
would when we hear overdose we tend to
have this perception of the person that
overdosed man I've got so many people
just floods because of putting this data
out of like
their their Uncle they're like people
are going in because they have pain and
end up getting hooked on these opioids
they have no intention on being a quote
a drug abuser so many people and also
fentanyl is so deadly like literally
just a few sprinkles of it can kill you
but it's being like laced in so many
other products today
right so cocaine from a drug like
illicit drug perspective yes so it's
being laced in a lot of things but also
because it makes the high better like
what's the if it's that dangerous you
can put less of the other stuff and just
a little bit of Fentanyl and everything
else cheap oh it's super cheap it's the
hottest thing going right now getting to
the degrees the number one leading it's
a leading cause of death that sound it
doesn't even sound right I know it
doesn't sound right so I spent the I
spent a lot of time almost too much time
like looking into these figures and
trying to see like breaking down how
this something like this is possible
this goes back to perfect people are
dying per year from fentanyl do you know
or even just opioids in general
in
2015-ish we had about 50 000 drug
overdose deaths just overall
by 2020
is a hundred thousand it doubled
overdose deaths doubled in that time
span
more and more and more fentanyl again
this was the trigger was Purdue Pharma
Purdue Pharma knowingly they they
package things up so that this wasn't
this was a non-addictive opioid wait
fentanyl is not addictive no or that was
how they packaged it up okay absolutely
but it ended up being just as addictive
as anything else yeah and deadly and so
uh HBO Max
there's a great documentary
and also there's a series on Hulu
starring Michael Keaton of all people
dopes kind of like yeah dope sick I
haven't seen it is it good it's pretty
good yeah it is pretty good but that's
like a fictional implica uh
implementation of real events versus
crime of the century documentary on HBO
Max or of course like because we have
such a visual culture I like to point
people through those things their entire
books on this subject matter as well
obviously the data's out there is scary
my more terrifying question is
why are we turning to drugs so much so
all the like rat studies and stuff and I
don't know this literature well so I'm
very much uh reciting headlines here but
the headline feels so right I would be
surprised if it isn't accurate
that it is very difficult to get a rat
addicted to drugs in its open field like
where it can literally just live its
life but if you put it in a cage then
they'll get addicted lickety-split
so my question is what is going on like
if we gave if we drop drugs into the
Savannah 150 000 years ago would they
get addicted or would they be so
um occupied I won't even say so thrilled
but so occupied with their life of
hunting Gathering loving marriage death
you know dealing with attacks like all
that stuff that they just wouldn't think
about it or would they boom it's just
that kind of thing and they would all
get addicted as well I love your
thinking man you know um there's always
been mind-altering substances that
humans have tinkered with right and
there's a big movement towards you know
plant medicine and all these different
things for certain experiences
but historically what it would be
involved with is something that might be
a rite of passage or might be involved
in like it's a it's a
experience that is a tribal aspect to it
it's always been done with this layer of
respect to the thing I don't have a
feeling that they were and I don't know
I am super ignorant on drugs but like
looking at what they've done to weed
where they've made it hyper potent like
it massively increase the THC levels
we've done the same thing to fruit so I
have to imagine you know that the drugs
while obviously still psychedelic may
not have packed quite the punch of
course way different scenario you know
again
RSS is happening upon this stuff might
you know take a little dabble and just
swear that stuff off right it just might
be overwhelming too much to send all the
things right but we even though our even
though our genes haven't changed much in
this time our environment has and our
level of intelligence in a sense
and I'm saying that to say I'm trying to
set up the answer which is
today is very different because we're
seeking it out
we're seeking out a solution to our pain
we're seeing causing our pain
share this many times we have epidemic
levels of physical pain and mental pain
mental health issues all-time high you
name it ADHD depression anxiety
schizophrenia everything is up
everything
and nobody's stopping to ask like what
is causing all of this dysfunction right
part of it is
obviously our exposures our environments
are very abnormal our food is very
abnormal and there's a direct inrose
obviously with what we're putting into
our bodies having
in essence we can have degrees of these
kind of mind-altering experiences right
because believe it or not that bowl of
Lucky Charms is a mind-altering
experience no doubt right and so but we
have is classification of oh these are
safe to do in our society alcohol is
huge huge
right it's one thing you're out at the
stadium getting [__] up
versus you being at home by yourself and
doing it right and also it's socially
acceptable if the police really want to
get DWIs and just sit outside of
stadiums but they don't do that
right it's not fair game but that's a
that is the most socially acceptable
psychoactive substance that kills more
people than
other drugs until fentanyl came along
right but that's even still alcohol is
way up there it's not in that same kind
of classification right
violence
right weight gain all the things
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease is
it's it's just way it's the top top 10
too liver disease whoa right so it's
either 11 or 10 right now right our
livers are getting [__] up
right what are the inputs here alcohol
is one of the big ones and also
obviously sugar too okay so this sets up
the point
oftentimes we have this
perception of what somebody who uses
drugs is
right
we negate the fact that over 70 percent
of United States citizens are on
prescription drugs
okay right now our society we are very
Adept at taking a pill
to make us feel something that's a
really terrifying number okay it's
normalized and so whether it's
self-medicated or your doctor is your
dealer
we have a culture that is seeking to
suppress our pain physical and mental
instead of removing the root cause or
dressing what's causing the
manifestation
I was just talking with Wendy Suzuki Dr
Wendy Suzuki she's a neuroscientist out
of NYU
I've done some guest lectures for her
Neuroscience students as well
and she has a wonderful book it's called
good anxiety
and she's addressing our epidemic of
anxiety epidemics because anxiety isn't
just one thing every person is different
but directing people towards something
that's more sustainable and effective
which is addressing what is causing the
anxiety
and not just where drugs are appropriate
in in instances absolutely it's great to
have these things
but when it's relied upon
what tends to happen is we're
suppressing something our body's giving
us and our mind this important critical
biological feedback that something is
off here but we don't want to feel the
feeling
I want to feel that
so we push it down we suppress it take
mind altering substances whether it's a
drug whether it's food whatever the case
might be and we're not connected to our
humanness
so going back to our ancestors happening
upon this stuff they were more connected
to their humanness
today we have these voids within our
psyche and within our spirit and in our
bodies were so disassociated from how
[__] makes us feel and we're so
externally focused
social media and it's a golden age of
Television it's a lot of [__] a lot of
great [__] competing right
to not be able to have control most
people don't
um they're they're binge watching daily
all right it's great to have a nice
binge watch I like stranger things
is great but I put it in its pocket and
if I'm going to be a healthy sovereign
individual today I need to focus more on
creation than on consumption
right
cultivating my humanness the biggest
change that happened to me Tom
over those two years of pain
I was in so much pain I was afraid to
get up
so I sat and laid on the floor as much
as I could in this one bedroom apartment
in Ferguson Missouri while sleeping on
the floor
everything changed
unexpectedly
when I decided number one of course I
decided to do something when I've been
Outsourcing my health and my potential
to everybody else what happened
the the last physician that I saw
you know again are seeking out my friend
would be like oh this person's the best
so
three other opinions and the final one I
was sitting at home
I had my pill bottle
sitting on the side of my bed about to
take these drugs and try to knock me out
and I just really visualized
for whatever reason I don't know why
this happened but I visualized the
doctor being at home with his family and
you know kicking back by the fireplace
maybe smoking a pipe or some [__] you
know like a very
cartoonish kind of romantic idea and but
the feeling tone was he's happy he's not
thinking about me
I left with the baggage he's living his
life
and I out I Outsource my potential to
somebody who's not even thinking about
me not to say that he didn't mean well
no no but the [__] that that's a keen
Insight very keen yeah and so so he's
not thinking about me I'm thinking about
me but what makes you in that moment are
you deciding something is possible or
I'm just gonna try I'm not gonna
Outsource and I'm gonna start over yeah
in that moment the trigger was a change
in my question my habitual question
because at the time I was like why won't
he help me why won't somebody help me
why me why me why won't somebody help me
and the question changed to what can I
do
what can I do to feel better and I never
thought about that once those two years
were you fed up and you got to that
point did you read something somebody
say something that that moment right
there is the most profound change anyone
will ever make so I really want to know
what made you make that change
being able to work with so many people
over the years this recipe is different
for everybody but for me it was this
recipe of ingredients
one of them was my grandmother
and she had been in my mind harassing me
to check on me those last two years
because it's like my grandma like I'm
fine like leave me alone she's just like
are you good are you just checking in on
me you know what I felt to be way too
much she knew I wasn't okay
but I'd always been the one that was
okay
was it knowing that she loved you like
because I really want to know the recipe
to it won't work for everybody but there
will be more people like you so somebody
loves me the doctor's not thinking about
me
what else yeah
it wasn't just love it was belief in me
she believed that I would be successful
she taught me from a young age
that I was going to do something great
with my life I was going to be a great
man she would say my life conditions
didn't match up to my blueprint
of what my life was supposed to be and I
did I
Tom the reason that I was at this place
was because I've been fighting so much
of my life up to that age of 20. like
I'm again I'm in Ferguson on sleeping on
the floor you know my mattress is on the
floor
and
I'm barely hanging on the cause I was
the first person in my family to go to
college let alone graduate
and I grew up in a state where I got
kicked out of my entire junior year I
graduated three years of high school I
got kicked out for fighting right when I
went to college you think I get my [__]
together I got kicked out of college
fighting right I grew up in an
environment where we solved problems
through violence and I didn't really
feel like I was a violent person
I didn't want to start anything but if
you started
I'm going to finish it or I'm going to
do something right and so that way of
living we lived my most my most
formative years when I really feel like
I went from being like a kid to really
taking ownership kind of of my myself
and my life
we live right next door to a crack house
and
my father my stepfather
I just thought because we saw the
devastation happen with my uncles
dying from crack cocaine continuously
like getting [__] up and end up in
prison all the things I thought we
established that this wouldn't be you
you would never do this
and he's in this house next door
and I was 12 13 years old
I heard my mother outside yelling at him
and I just kind of peeked my head down
the stairs like and I heard what she
said that he was in in there in the
crack house
and I want he started to walk up the
stairs I want to kick him down the
stairs so [__] bad
I could I could have hurt him I loved
him so much
so what I did instead I ran over to the
it was a four family flat and it was a
glass door to to get to their real door
and I pressed the door and I broke the
glass of this crack house
or they have guns you know what I'm
saying I was just screaming I hate you I
hate you why'd you do this to my family
ah fortunately a friend of the family
grabbed me they hid me like I was
hitting this
you know in a closet somewhere and like
I can still hear all the commotion
outside and they were looking for me
and they were able to de-escalate the
situation but again I was responding
like this and again you could see it
maybe rightfully so right but I grew up
in this
very volatile circumstance I was the one
that was supposed to make it
and here I was
I gave my power away the one who always
took his power gave my power away when
he gave me permission to that first
position when he said I'm unhelpable it
gave me
it gave me a permission slip to stop
fighting
and I took it
Shameless chills
so but that didn't sit well obviously
when my spirit eventually it took two
years and I'd gotten you know I was
overweight and in a lot of pain but I my
grandmother
harassing me you know checking in on me
and the coupled with that vision of you
know this person says he can't help me
why am I listening to him
what can I do to get healthier
my life is supposed to be great
what can I do to get well and I changed
the question
and as you know like the human brain
really questions are the answer you know
there's this process in the brain it's
called instinctive elaboration so when
you pose the human mind a question like
this is why shows get us right the open
Loops like it's seeking out to find
answers and I ask what can I do to feel
better
and also I'm a very practical person
which I turned that [__] off for those
two years I was like
what what are some actual tactical
things that I could do to like get
better like I need to lose weight first
thing I did was Slim Fast don't
recommend it's not very effective but
it's because of like okay what what do I
have access to but the low-hanging fruit
for me I'd always been an athlete
and so I just started going to the gym
every doctor said don't do anything
which the worst thing you could do is do
nothing
I could still [__] walk Tom I could
walk I was in pain but I could move and
they were telling me don't move that's
our advice to you that's how we're going
to help you but then again they don't
talk to me again they send me out the
door with the back brace and some drugs
and say don't do anything
and now not only is my spine atrophying
my entire physiology is and so just
being able to start to move my body
to upgrade the food I was bringing in
because again the real solution at the
end of the day was what was I making my
tissues out of my discs that looked like
two pieces of fried bologna on that MRI
initially the light should be shining
through them it was made of absolute
[__] like absolute garbage
I ate fast food every day unless again
like I didn't have a dollar then I ate
fast food at the house well Ultra
processed foods which was my favorite
meal
Velveeta Shells and cheese I just eat a
box of that [__] you know and ramen
noodles you know like again I'm just
eating processed food every day so I'm
making my tissues out of really low
quality [__] my body's doing the best it
can do to keep me alive what if I get my
body the best stuff
the sulfur-bearing amino acids the
vitamin D like you need Vitamin D just
for assimilation of nutrients for your
bones we talked a little bit before the
show I broke my hip at track practice
just running why my bones so brittle
no all I know is calcium from the
commercials you know but there are so
many other things that I uncovered and
here's the last part of the story the
solutions were there the whole time I
just wasn't attuned to them the books
the resources the people they were there
I was just so busy in my world of I'm
unhelpable
and things can't get better that I just
ignored the solutions possible solutions
access to solutions that were there all
along
that's so powerful there's a quote I
forget the exact idea but never explain
an outcome to nefarious intent what can
be explained by incompetence
and so I don't think people mean to [__]
us up I don't think the drug companies
mean to [__] us up I'm grateful for a
lot of the drugs I don't think the food
industry means to [__] us up I'm
grateful for hyper palatable food cheap
and convenience I don't think social
media means to [__] us up I'm grateful
for the people that I've been able to
connect with you and I wouldn't be
sitting here together if it wasn't for
social media so all of these things have
had huge benefits in my life but like
you I sat on the edge of the bed one day
and I looked at my life not moving in
the direction that I wanted and I
decided to take complete responsibility
for the outcome of my life now once you
do that you have to start looking at the
data what's actually working what allows
me to predict the outcome of my actions
better and so that puts you on this very
useful trajectory but if you never have
that click over moment
then you get prescribed the drugs you
take the drugs you go to McDonald's
because it has the dollar menu or at
least it did when I was younger uh and
you know all of these things sort of
snowball you into a really dark place
and I
I am concerned right now because of the
way things are going and I feel like
that I mean you gave some crazy Stats
today 80 this 88 that 78 is like it's
just really really startling and so I'm
about to tell people the coolest piece
of information I've ever gotten from you
which will be the punch line to all this
but before I do tell people where they
can follow you and learn more perfect
man it's always an honor to talk with
you always the same for you man people
could find me my show is called the
model Health show and you know we do
master classes on specific subjects and
I strive same as you to bring on the
very best people in respective fields
and grateful to say it's been the number
one Health show many many times over and
again this is coming from a guy from
Ferguson Missouri sleeping on a mattress
on the floor and for me to do this it
really is a testament to what's possible
and just grateful to do the work that
I'm doing
um people can of course you know hit me
up on Instagram I'm at Sean model on
Instagram I do a lot over there and my
most recent books eat smarter
uh USA Today National bestseller and
sleep smarter International bestseller
is creeping its way into half a million
copies sold of a Sleep Book which is
incredibly rare you know it really
helped to change the culture so you know
those are the places people connect with
me it's amazing and I highly recommend
it okay so back to what we were talking
about the quote that I wrote down when I
was researching you is food is
information
but so are thoughts thoughts are
information and once people realize what
what you are eating is having an impact
on how you think believe it or not so I
went on a horrendous journey of anxiety
dealing with that and I realized that 70
of my anxiety the part that made it
overwhelming and made my life near and
tenable was from
um diet drinks and once I remove the I
could not believe that changed my life
in in no small way and the thought that
the the biggest part of it it's not the
total cause of my anxiety but the
biggest part of my anxiety was something
I was drinking just it seemed impossible
and so getting people to recognize that
that food is information it's
communicating to you at a cellular level
it's making you think in different ways
we didn't get to it today but you've
talked about how in prisons they did a
study if you increase their nutrition
make their nutrition Superior it
decreases the violence pretty
substantially it's insane so getting
people to understand what you're eating
Believe It or Not matters how you sleep
matters your exercise matters and what
you allow yourself to think matters and
so I hope that they don't need to go
through a two-year struggle like you did
or the multi-year struggle that I went
through with anxiety and instead they
can learn easily what you and I have
learned with great difficulty and
recognize what they think matters as
well and that they have to get that
right because it's all information
Sean thank you so much for being here
speaking of good information if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care peace
our main Discovery is that there is a
switch that animals use to go from being
a normal way to overweight that switch
you can activate it by certain types of
foods